JT V3 edits (#3759)
viamrobotics/docs: docs/operate/control/headless-app.md

layout: "docs"
type: "docs"
no_list: true
description: "Run control logic on a machine."
images: ["/general/code.png"]
aliases:
  - "product-overviews/sdk-as-client"
  - "program/sdk-as-client"
  - "program/sdks"
  - /program/
  - /program/run/
  - /program/debug/
---

To write control logic for your machine that will run without a user interface, you can use the Python, Go, or C++ SDK.

> The SDKs include similar methods to hit Viam's [gRPC API](https://github.com/viamrobotics/api) endpoints, so choose the language you feel most comfortable scripting in.

Author: ```suggestion
The SDKs each include similar methods to hit Viam's [gRPC API](https://github.com/viamrobotics/api) endpoints.
```

> 
> {{% alert title="In this page" color="tip" %}}
> 
> 1. [Install an SDK](#install-an-sdk)
> 1. [Authenticate your script to your machine with API keys](#authenticate-your-script)
> 1. [Write your control script](#write-your-control-script)
> 1. [Run your script](#run-your-script)
> 1. [Debug](#debug)
> 
> {{% /alert %}}

Author: ```suggestion
```

```sh {class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
python3 -m venv .venv
source .venv/bin/activate
pip install viam-sdk
```

Windows is not supported.
If you are using Windows, use the [Windows Subsystem for Linux (WSL)](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/wsl/install) and install the Python SDK using the preceding instructions for Linux.
For other unsupported systems, see [Installing from source](https://python.viam.dev/#installing-from-source).

If you intend to use the [ML (machine learning) model service](/services/ml/), use the following command instead, which installs additional required dependencies along with the Python SDK:

```sh {class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
pip install 'viam-sdk[mlmodel]'
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="Go" %}}

Run the following command to install the [Viam Go SDK](https://pkg.go.dev/go.viam.com/rdk):

```sh {class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
go get go.viam.com/rdk/robot/client
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="C++" %}}

Follow the [instructions on the GitHub repository](https://github.com/viamrobotics/viam-cpp-sdk/blob/main/BUILDING.md).

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

> ## Authenticate your script

Author: Ah fair point. Will change language now and look into good examples later https://viam.atlassian.net/browse/DOCS-3290

> To connect your code to your machine, use the API keys Viam automatically generates for you.

Reviewer: I think we want to think more general. It could be the case that this headless app manages multiple machines that are maybe working in collaboration. In that case you may want to authenticate not with the API keys for a machine but with the API keys for a location or organization. See how you like this:

```suggestion
You can find sample connection code on a machine's **CONNECT** tab in the [Viam app](link):
```

> 
> 1. On your machine's page in the [Viam app](https://app.viam.com), click the **CONNECT** tab.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

1. Select your preferred programming **Language**.
   A fully functional code snippet will be displayed, with connection code as well as some calls to the APIs of the resources you've configured on your machine.
   The machine address (which resembles `12345.somemachine-main.viam.cloud`) auto-populates into the connection code.
   It is a public address to connect to your machine.

> 1. Toggle the **Include API key** to auto-populate the API key and API key ID into the code.
>    You can either:
> 
>    - Copy the code with the API key in it, **OR**
>    - To reduce the risk of accidentally sharing your API key when collaborating on code, create environment variables for the API key and API key ID, and copy the code with **Include API key** toggled off.

Reviewer: I think this is going in the direction of explaining UI possibly to much. We may be able to simplify. I think it's also worth considering where we point people to API keys that have broader scope. And we probably need to create content for API keys in reference or somewhere else. 
```suggestion
1. Copy the sample code.
   We strongly recommend to store your API keys in environment variables to reduce (...).
   If your code will connect to multiple machines or use [Platform APIs](/dev/reference/apis/#platform-ap) you can [create an API key with broader access](TODO).  
```

Author: That is fair. And then whatever we end up with on this page probably gets added in the mobile and web app pages too. I think API key content makes the most sense in Control Access, and then we'd link to that from here, essentially saying "you can use the machine API key to access a single machine, or for access to multiple machines, read about location-level and org-level API keys here"

   {{% /tab %}}
   {{% tab name="C++" %}}

   The machine connection code will resemble the following:

   ```cpp {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers" data-line="1,5,7"}
   std::string host("ADDRESS FROM THE VIAM APP");
   DialOptions dial_opts;
   dial_opts.set_type("api-key");
   // Replace "<API-KEY-ID>" with your machine's API key ID
   dial_opts.set_entity("<API-KEY-ID>");
   // Replace "<API-KEY>" with your machine's API key
   Credentials credentials("<API-KEY>");
   dial_opts.set_credentials(credentials);
   boost::optional<DialOptions> opts(dial_opts);
   Options options(0, opts);

   auto robot = RobotClient::at_address(host, options);
   ```

   Copy not just this function but the entire code snippet on the **CONNECT** tab if you'd like to test your connection with some basic API calls.

   {{% /tab %}}
   {{< /tabs >}}

{{< alert title="Caution" color="caution" >}}
Do not share your machine part API key or machine address publicly.
Sharing this information could compromise your system security by allowing unauthorized access to your machine, or to the computer running your machine.
{{< /alert >}}

## Write your control script

> Save the code on the computer or SBC where you'll run it.
> Edit it to add your control logic.

Reviewer: I think these can be cut? The main important thing is to point people at the APIs here I think? And then showing the examples seems good. I was vaguely wondering if https://docs.viam.com/#program-any-device would come in useful anywhere but with the languages more separated out it seems awkward. 
```suggestion
```

Author: Hmm I could use a version of program any device just with TS and Flutter stripped out... I'm thinking that full examples are better because they show getting the resource from the robot etc., and don't leave the user wondering how it all ties together, but the program any device content does showcase the APIs nicely. Will have a think.

Author: As far as deleting these lines, I think we've gotten feedback at some point(s) that people were confused about not just how the code talks to the machine, but also where the code goes and where the SDK is installed etc. Maybe that was only newer hobbyists though and this is obvious.

        api_key=robot_api_key,
        api_key_id=robot_api_key_id
    )
    return await RobotClient.at_address(robot_address, opts)

async def main():
    machine = await connect()

    pms_7003 = Sensor.from_robot(machine, sensor_name)
    kasa_plug = Generic.from_robot(machine, plug_name)

    # Define unhealthy thresholds
    unhealthy_thresholds = {
        'pm2_5_atm': 35.4,
        'pm10_atm': 150
    }

    while True:
        readings = await pms_7003.get_readings()
        # Check if any of the PM values exceed the unhealthy thresholds
        if any(readings.get(pm_type, 0) > threshold for pm_type, threshold in unhealthy_thresholds.items()):
            LOGGER.info('UNHEALTHY.')
            await kasa_plug.do_command({"toggle_on": []})
        else:
            LOGGER.info('HEALTHY!')
            await kasa_plug.do_command({"toggle_off": []})

        # wait before checking again
        await asyncio.sleep(10)

if __name__ == '__main__':
    asyncio.run(main())
```

{{< /expand >}}

## Run your script

You can run your script manually from your terminal, or you can automatically run it each time your machine starts.

### Run your script manually

> To run your script on a laptop or desktop, or to run it on your machine's SBC manually for testing purposes, execute the following command in a terminal:

Reviewer: I think since they can run it anywhere (even in the cloud) we should simplify.
```suggestion
To run your script, execute the following command in a terminal:
```

Author: I meant for this to create distinction between this section and the run as process section. They can't really run as a process on a laptop or desktop (or at least most people wouldn't for practical reasons).

{{% /alert %}}

To configure a process, click the **+** button on your machine's **CONFIGURE** tab and select **Process**.
For detailed configuration information, see [Configure a managed process](/manage/reference/processes/).

#### Example

The following example executes the command `python3 my_cool_script.py` in your <file>/home/myName/project/</file> directory every time your machine boots, and restarts the process if it stops running.

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab name="Builder mode" %}}

![The CONFIGURE tab with a process called run-my-code configured. The executable is python3, the argument is my_cool_script.py, and the working directory is /home/myName/project. Logging is turned on and execute once is turned off.](/build/configure/process-fancy.png)

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="JSON" %}}

```json
"processes": [
    {
      "id": "run-my-code",
      "log": true,
      "name": "python3",
      "args": [
        "my_cool_script.py"
      ],
      "cwd": "/home/myName/project/"
    }
  ]
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

## Debug

Read and filter a machine's logs to view updates from your machine's `viam-server` instance and troubleshoot issues with your program.

{{< tabs >}}

> {{% tab name="App UI" %}}

Reviewer: UI here is outdated. you can pull the newer video of log filtering here, take a new screenshot or remove the image

Author: Took a new screenshot
